Hello and welcome back to the course on stats.
Today we're talking about the cantors diagonal argument.
This is an excerpt tutorial.
It's definitely not compulsory.
While none of these are compulsory but is definitely not something that's required for you to understand
the rest of the trolls in this course but at the same time I find this whole concept very fascinating
and I really love the Cantor's argument and I wanted to share with you.
I thought it was really really cool I thought you'd like it so this have a look what does it all about.
Well we spoke about continuous variables in this section and we said that continuous variables are different
to discrete because there they can take any values and for instance you know the size of your foot.
Could be any value between.
I don't know like 2 or 4 inches or big feet are zero inches to be safe to maybe 24 inches or 50 inches
maximum.
So how can that be.
Well let's look at the Circle line.
Let's say we have values 0 and 1 in the set theory or in the theory of sets.
You have different types of numbers right.
Where in real life we have different types of numbers we have normal numbers we have xyz like 1 2 3
4 5 6 7.
We have fractions we have like one half three quarters.
15:12 is also fraction.
We have irrational numbers which cannot be presented as fractions like pi or what else do we have.
Ply or square root of 2.
Those are irrational numbers and so in essence any number that you can think of except for imaginary
numbers.
A real number and it goes on this line between me minus infinity plus infinity.
And but let's just look at between 0 and 1.
The point that we're making is that there is an infinite number of numbers between 0 and 1.
So we already know that there's an infinite numbers on this line.
And for instance you could say there's an infinite number of natural numbers so there is not a natural
number but say that natural numbers are like what numbers which you use for counting one apple to apples
three apples and honesty is an infinite you can well whatever number you say.
I can say a number that plus 1 and therefore there is an infinite number of them but even more interesting
thing is how can there be an infinite number of numbers between 0 and 1.
Then that's what the Cantor's diagonal argument is about.
And that the same thing applies to feed size so 4 feet sizes is from 0 to let's say not one but two
100 inches or 50 inches whatever it is.
And there's an infinite number of feet sizes in between 0 and 50 inches.
And that's what we mean when we are talking about continuous that's it's a continuum and that's very
very interesting and with the Cantor's diagonal argument what we're going to prove to prove something
even more powerful even stronger than that.
We're going to say the number this is the fun is.
Like I learned this in grade 9 we had a theory of sets.
And I remember I was like when we were in class or I think I had like check in the hospital of the times
I had to be in the hospital for a few days.
But anyway I was.
I remember I was like a snake instead of playing computer games while I had this time off.
I was so fascinated with mathematics and I loved it.
But what's the point.
The point here is that we're going to prove something even more powerful that.
Yeah the numbers between 0 and 1.
The amount of real numbers between 0 and 1 is even greater than the number of natural numbers so these
numbers in here basically can't count them.
If they were the same infinity like this infinity is stronger than that infinity of 1 2 3 4 5 6 and
up to infinity this infinity between 0 and 1 is even stronger than that infinity.
And what that means is that you cannot count them so you cannot assign every one of the values here
a natural number.
So let's see how we do that.
And it's a very simple proof and that's why I love it.
It's such a complex philosophical notion.
So we're going to start rufous square and that in mathematics means that we're starting the proof with
theory.
So we're going to make it really really formal here.
Let's have some fun so here we go.
Let's say we could count them.
Let's make an assumption.
We're going to assume that we did count them like we are to prove something by assuming the opposite.
And then if we come to a contradiction that means our assumption was incorrect.
So let's say we did count them and we take the first number one label number one we going to assign
2 and then we write the number that we found that we assigned this label to.
So we did come up with a way to called them.
Now let's just write them out.
If we did how hard is it to write them out just write them.
So we are writing out the first one I got.
So this is what we are saying.
Level 1 2.
OK great.
The second label label number 2 of natural numbers is assigned to real value between 0 and 1 of 0 it
for 3 5 6 2 4 7 and so on and they might be more digits after that we know but we just don't get to
write them all three label the three is assigned to this value four is assigned to this value and so
on.
So let's say we did count them and we're just writing them right here and we just keep doing that we
just keep writing them all out.
And now what Cantrill agonal argument does is just it's just like his genius is Kunzru says OK how about
we do small quick thing here we just take a diagonal going through these values that we've written out
infinit diagonal going that way and then I'm going to look at it.
What are Cantor says Watch this.
I'm going to do a magic trick.
I'm going to personating him I don't know if he actually said that in my head he says I'm going to come
up with a new number that you don't actually have here that you cannot possibly have in your list of
numbers that you've written out and then you like how you how you did that.
Well it's very simple.
So my numbers going to start with 0 is going to have a dot and then instead of the 9 I'm going to just
take every number like for the first number here I'm going to look at the first row and instead of the
9 going to put any other numbers I'm going to win 8.
And then for the second row I'm going to put any other number you can put a one third row I'm going
to put any other number then a 7 a zero fourth for there are any other than a 9 3 and so on.
So every time for every digit after the decimal I look at that associated roll.
That's why it's called the diagonal and I find the digit that is is there.
And I put any other digit.
So that's my only rule.
OK 9 so put a 1 1 I'll put a 9.
Doesn't matter.
You can put any numbers just as long as they don't match to the one that is above and.
And so on.
And what that means is now the question is.
Ok cool.
I wrote this out.
What number in your process that you finished.
You've written it out.
What number did you assign to this value so this value is indeed between 0 and 1.
So what number did you assigned to it.
Question mark.
And the answer is you haven't decided and you value to it.
Why.
Well because if you tell me that you assigned number like natural number 100 and one to this value I
will say that's not the case because the way I built this number the hundred and first digit in this
number will not match up with what you saying just the way I built it because when I was going through
diagonal as soon as I got to 100 in one I chose the other digit I didn't.
I picked a digit different to the one you have in your Dagh in the in your set that you were denied.
So whatever number you say whatever natural number you think you assigned to this real number is going
to be incorrect because of the way I built this real number and that is that means we have a contradiction.
That means that this scenario is impossible.
That means you couldn't have written them out and we have a contradiction that means our assumption
was initially incorrect and that means we have proven our theory.
That's the number or the the values between 0 and 1 the numbers between 0 and 1 they're infinite.
And moreover they're infinite because there's even more of them than natural numbers.
But that's the second part.
They're infinite.
And moreover they're that infinity is stronger infinity than the infinity of natural numbers.
So basically speak speak and you can prove it the same way.
It is a bit more to it but you can extract and extend that proof and say that the number of real values
from minus infinity to infinity so all numbers you can think of except for imaginary numbers.
Now the number of those numbers is greater than the number of natural numbers.
And it's actually that infinity is identical to the infinity between 0 and 1.
So basically what this is saying is that first of all in terms of what we need for this course continuous
variables.
Indeed they are continuous and that means between any two digits between any two numbers there there's
always a number and more or less infinite amount of them in there.
And dislodges between 0 and 1.
You could say the same thing between 0 and zero point five or 0.4 and zero point forty five between
any two real numbers.
There is an infinite number of numbers and moreover that infinity.
And this is like an exchange something we don't really need for this course but just call that infinity
this infinity is stronger than this infinity.
And that's just mind boggling.
You know it's really hard to imagine infinity on its own.
But OK let's think of it as a theoretical mathematical concept but then it's like Inception is like
a new level.
There's an infinity that is stronger than this infinity.
And like give you a quick heads up if you if you ever decide you're going to set theory even further
you'll find out that there's an infinite amount number of infinite powers so there's infinity there's
an infinity that is even stronger than this infinity.
And then there's an infinity that is even stronger than infinity and it's just kind of just crazy.
It's so cool it's like we you know we work with numbers all the time in life but we don't realize that
these things are how these things are like in the background that there's an infinite number of natural
numbers you can imagine that but that there's an infinite number of numbers on your ruler between 0
and 1.
Now it's not in my that's really hard to imagine.
And then that that infinity is even greater than infinity of natural numbers.
That's just like really really philosophical and really mind boggling.
Anyway hope you enjoyed Cantor's diagonal argument and now you know a little bit more about numbers
and why there's infinite amount of them and why continuous is called continuous.
And I look forward seeing it throughout the rest of the course.
We're going to have lots of fun.
And until next I'm happy analyzing.